



IPPM                                                          T. Mizrahi
Internet-Draft                          Huawei Network.IO Innovation Lab
Intended status: Standards Track                            F. Brockners
Expires: September 11, 2019                                  S. Bhandari
                                                          R. Sivakolundu
                                                            C. Pignataro
                                                                   Cisco
                                                                 A. Kfir
                                                                B. Gafni
                                             Mellanox Technologies, Inc.
                                                              M. Spiegel
                                                       Barefoot Networks
                                                                J. Lemon
                                                                Broadcom
                                                          March 10, 2019


                           In-situ OAM Flags
                    draft-mizrahi-ippm-ioam-flags-00

Abstract

   In-situ Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (IOAM) records
   operational and telemetry information in the packet while the packet
   traverses a path between two points in the network.  This document
   presents new flags in the IOAM Trace Option headers.  Specifically,
   the document defines the Loopback, Active, and Immediate Export
   flags.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 11, 2019.






Mizrahi, et al.        Expires September 11, 2019               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 IOAM Flags                     March 2019


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  Requirement Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  New IOAM Trace Option Flags . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Loopback in IOAM  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   5.  Active Measurement with IOAM  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   6.  Immediate Exporting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   8.  Performance Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   9.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9

1.  Introduction

   IOAM [I-D.ietf-ippm-ioam-data] is used for monitoring traffic in the
   network by incorporating IOAM data fields into in-flight data
   packets.

   IOAM data may be represented in one of four possible IOAM options:
   Pre-allocated Trace Option, Incremental Trace Option, Proof of
   Transit (POT) Option, and Edge-to-Edge Option.  This document defines
   three new flags in the Pre-allocated and Incremental Trace options:
   the Loopback, Active, and Immediate Export flags.







Mizrahi, et al.        Expires September 11, 2019               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 IOAM Flags                     March 2019


2.  Conventions

2.1.  Requirement Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

2.2.  Terminology

   Abbreviations used in this document:

   IOAM:      In-situ Operations, Administration, and Maintenance

   OAM:       Operations, Administration, and Maintenance

3.  New IOAM Trace Option Flags

   This document defines three new flags in the Pre-allocated and
   Incremental Trace options:

   Bit 1  "Loopback" (L-bit).  Loopback mode is used to send a copy of a
      packet back towards the source, as further described in Section 4.

   Bit 2  "Active" (A-bit).  When set, this indicates that this is an
      active IOAM packet, where "active" is used in the sense defined in
      [RFC7799], rather than a data packet.  The packet may be an IOAM
      probe packet, or a replicated data packet (the second and third
      use cases of Section 5).

   Bit 3  "Immediate Export" (I-bit).  Immediate export mode is used to
      export IOAM data fields immediately at every IOAM supported
      network node, instead of adding the IOAM data fields to the packet
      traversing the network.  Further details are provided in
      Section 6.

4.  Loopback in IOAM

   Loopback is used for trigerring each transit device along the path to
   loop back a copy of the data packet.  Loopback mode assumes that a
   return path from transit nodes and destination nodes towards the
   source exists.  The encapsulating node decides (e.g., using a filter)
   which packets loopback mode is enabled for by setting the loopback
   bit.  The encapsulating node also needs to ensure that sufficient
   space is available in the IOAM header for loopback operation, which
   includes intermediate nodes adding trace data on the original path
   and then again on the return path.  A loopback bit that is set
   indicates to the transit nodes processing this option that they are



Mizrahi, et al.        Expires September 11, 2019               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 IOAM Flags                     March 2019


   to create a copy of the received packet and send the copy back to the
   source of the packet.  The copy has its metadata added after being
   copied in order to allow any egress-dependent information to be set
   based on the egress of the copy rather than the original.  The
   original packet continues towards its destination.  The source
   address of the original packet is used as the destination address in
   the copied packet.  The address of the node performing the copy
   operation is used as the source address.  The L-bit MUST be cleared
   in the copy of the packet that a node sends back towards the source.
   On its way back towards the source, the copied packet is processed
   like any other packet with IOAM information, including adding any
   requested data at each transit node (assuming there is sufficient
   space).  Once the return packet reaches the IOAM domain boundary,
   IOAM decapsulation occurs as with any other packet containing IOAM
   information.  Because any intermediate node receiving such a packet
   would not know how to process the original packet, and because there
   would be a risk of the original packet leaking past the initiator of
   the IOAM loopback, the initiator of an IOAM loopback MUST be the
   initiator of the packet.  Once a loopback packet is received back at
   the initiator, it is a local matter how it is recognized as a
   loopback packet.

5.  Active Measurement with IOAM

   Active measurement methods [RFC7799] make use of synthetically
   generated packets in order to facilitate the measurement.  This
   section presents use cases of active measurement using the IOAM
   Active flag.

   The active flag indicates that a packet is used for active
   measurement.  An IOAM decapsulating node that receives a packet with
   the Active flag set in one of its Trace options must terminate the
   packet.

   An example of an IOAM deployment scenario is illustrated in Figure 1.
   The figure depicts two endpoints, a source and a destination.  The
   data traffic from the source to the destination is forwarded through
   a set of network devices, including an IOAM encapsulating node, which
   incorporates one or more IOAM option, a decapsulating node, which
   removes the IOAM options, optionally one or more transit nodes.  The
   IOAM options are encapsulated in one of the IOAM encapsulation types,
   e.g., [I-D.ietf-sfc-ioam-nsh], or
   [I-D.ioametal-ippm-6man-ioam-ipv6-options].








Mizrahi, et al.        Expires September 11, 2019               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 IOAM Flags                     March 2019


 +--------+     +--------+     +--------+     +--------+     +--------+
 |        |     |  IOAM  |.....|  IOAM  |.....|  IOAM  |     |        |
 +--------+     +--------+     +--------+     +--------+     +--------+
 | L2/L3  |<===>| L2/L3  |<===>| L2/L3  |<===>| L2/L3  |<===>| L2/L3  |
 +--------+     +--------+     +--------+     +--------+     +--------+
   Source      Encapsulating    Transit      Decapsulating   Destination
                   Node           Node           Node


                       Figure 1: Network using IOAM.

   This draft focuses on three possible use cases of active measurement
   using IOAM.  These use cases are described using the example of
   Figure 1.

   o  Endpoint active measurement: synthetic probe packets are sent
      between the source and destination, traversing the IOAM domain.
      Since the probe packets are sent between the endpoints, these
      packets are treated as data packets by the IOAM domain, and do not
      require special treatment at the IOAM layer.

   o  IOAM active measurement using probe packets: probe packets are
      generated and transmitted by the IOAM encapsulating node, and are
      expected to be terminated by the decapsulating node.  IOAM data
      related to probe packets may be exported by one or more nodes
      along its path, by an exporting protocol that is outside the scope
      of this document (e.g., [I-D.spiegel-ippm-ioam-rawexport]).  Probe
      packets include a Trace Option which has its Active flag set,
      indicating that the decapsulating node must terminate them.

   o  IOAM active measurement using replicated data packets: probe
      packets are created by the encapsulating node by selecting some or
      all of the en route data packets and replicating them.  A selected
      data packet that is replicated, and its (possibly truncated) copy
      is forwarded with one or more IOAM option, while the original
      packet is forwarded normally, without IOAM options.  To the extent
      possible, the original data packet and its replica are forwarded
      through the same path.  The replica includes a Trace Option that
      has its Active flag set, indicating that the decapsulating node
      should terminate it.

6.  Immediate Exporting

   Immediate exporting can be used to export IOAM data to a collector
   instead of incorporating this data into en route data packets.  The
   various types of IOAM nodes MUST process packets with the I-bit set
   as follows:




Mizrahi, et al.        Expires September 11, 2019               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 IOAM Flags                     March 2019


   1.  An encapsulating IOAM node configured to set the I-bit
       encapsulates the packet with the IOAM header and sets the I-bit,
       leaving the IOAM header without locally collected data, and
       exports the requested IOAM data immediately.  The encapsulating
       IOAM node is the only type of node allowed to set the I-bit.

   2.  A transit node that processes a packet with the I-bit set is
       expected to export the requested IOAM data, and not incorporate
       it into the IOAM header.

   3.  A decapsulating IOAM node that processes a packet with the I-bit
       set is expected to export the requested IOAM data, and
       decapsulate the IOAM header.

   Note that in case of "Immediate Export" being employed, no IOAM trace
   data is added to the packets traversing the network.  As a means to
   support correlation of exported IOAM data different nodes in the
   network, a deployment could consider attaching an IOAM E2E option in
   addition to the trace option, that includes a sequence number.  See
   Bit 1 in the IOAM-E2E-Types.  Please refer to
   [I-D.ietf-ippm-ioam-data] for a discussion of IOAM data export and
   associated formats.

7.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is requested to allocate the following bits in the "IOAM Trace
   Flags Registry" as follows:

   Bit 1  "Loopback" (L-bit)

   Bit 2  "Active" (A-bit)

   Bit 3  "Immediate Export" (I-bit)

   Note that bit 0 is the most significant bit in the Flags Registry.

8.  Performance Considerations

   Each of the three flags that are defined in this document may have
   performance implications.  When using the loopback mechanism a copy
   of the data packet is sent back to the sender, thus generating more
   traffic than originally sent by the endpoints.  Using active
   measurement with the active flag requires the use of synthetic
   (overhead) traffic.  The Immediate Export flag triggers exported
   packets to be exported to a collector, which in some cases may impact
   the collector's performance, or the performance along the paths
   leading to the collector.




Mizrahi, et al.        Expires September 11, 2019               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 IOAM Flags                     March 2019


   Each of the three mechanisms has a cost in terms of the network
   bandwidth, and may potentially load the node that analyzes the data.
   Therefore, rate limiting may be enabled so as to ensure that the
   three mechanisms are used at a rate that does not significantly
   affect the network bandwidth, and does not overload the collector (or
   the source node in the case of loopback).  It should be possible to
   use each of the three mechanisms on a subset of the data traffic.

9.  Security Considerations

   The security considerations of IOAM in general are discussed in
   [I-D.ietf-ippm-ioam-data].  Specifically, an attacker may try to use
   the functionality that is defined in this document to attack the
   network.

   An attacker may attempt to overload network devices by injecting
   synthetic packets that include an IOAM Trace Option with one or more
   of the flags defined in this document.  Similarly, an on-path
   attacker may maliciously set one or more of the flags of transit
   packets.

   o  Loopback flag: an attacker that sets this flag, either in
      synthetic packets or transit packet, can potentially cause an
      amplification, since each device along the path creates a copy of
      the data packet and sends it back to the source.  The attacker can
      potentially leverage the loopback flag for a Distributed Denial of
      Service (DDoS) attack, as multiple devices send looped-back copies
      of a packet to a single source.

   o  Active flag: the impact of synthetic packets with the active flag
      is no worse than synthetic data packets in which the Active flag
      is not set.  By setting the active flag in en route packets an
      attacker can prevent these packets from reaching their
      destination, since the packet is terminated by the decapsulating
      device; however, note that an on-path attacker may achieve the
      same goal by changing the destination address of a packet.
      Another potential threat is amplification; if an attacker causes
      transit switches to replicate more packets than they are intended
      to replicate, either by setting the Active flag or by sending
      synthetic packets, then traffic is amplified, causing bandwidth
      degredation.

   o  Immediate Export flag: setting this flag, either in synthetic
      packets or in transit packets may overload the collector or
      analyzer devices.  Since this flag affects multiple devices along
      the network path, it potentially amplifies the effect on the
      network bandwidth and on the collector's load.




Mizrahi, et al.        Expires September 11, 2019               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 IOAM Flags                     March 2019


   In order to mitigate the attacks described above, it should be
   possible for IOAM-enabled devices to limit each of the three
   mechanisms to a configurable rate; Network devices should be able to
   limit the rate of: (i) looped-back traffic, (ii) replicated active
   packets, and (iii) exported packets.

   IOAM is assumed to be deployed in a restricted administrative domain,
   thus limiting the scope of the threats above and their affect.  This
   is a fundamental assumtion with respect to the security aspects of
   IOAM, as further discussed in [I-D.ietf-ippm-ioam-data].

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-ippm-ioam-data]
              Brockners, F., Bhandari, S., Pignataro, C., Gredler, H.,
              Leddy, J., Youell, S., Mizrahi, T., Mozes, D., Lapukhov,
              P., Chang, R., daniel.bernier@bell.ca, d., and J. Lemon,
              "Data Fields for In-situ OAM", draft-ietf-ippm-ioam-
              data-05 (work in progress), March 2019.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

10.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-sfc-ioam-nsh]
              Brockners, F., Bhandari, S., Govindan, V., Pignataro, C.,
              Gredler, H., Leddy, J., Youell, S., Mizrahi, T., Mozes,
              D., Lapukhov, P., and R. Chang, "Network Service Header
              (NSH) Encapsulation for In-situ OAM (IOAM) Data", draft-
              ietf-sfc-ioam-nsh-01 (work in progress), March 2019.

   [I-D.ioametal-ippm-6man-ioam-ipv6-options]
              Bhandari, S., Brockners, F., Pignataro, C., Gredler, H.,
              Leddy, J., Youell, S., Mizrahi, T., Kfir, A., Gafni, B.,
              Lapukhov, P., Spiegel, M., Krishnan, S., and R. Asati,
              "In-situ OAM IPv6 Options", draft-ioametal-ippm-6man-ioam-
              ipv6-options-02 (work in progress), March 2019.

   [I-D.spiegel-ippm-ioam-rawexport]
              Spiegel, M., Brockners, F., Bhandari, S., and R.
              Sivakolundu, "In-situ OAM raw data export with IPFIX",
              draft-spiegel-ippm-ioam-rawexport-01 (work in progress),
              October 2018.



Mizrahi, et al.        Expires September 11, 2019               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                 IOAM Flags                     March 2019


   [RFC7799]  Morton, A., "Active and Passive Metrics and Methods (with
              Hybrid Types In-Between)", RFC 7799, DOI 10.17487/RFC7799,
              May 2016, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7799>.

Authors' Addresses

   Tal Mizrahi
   Huawei Network.IO Innovation Lab
   Israel

   Email: tal.mizrahi.phd@gmail.com


   Frank Brockners
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   Hansaallee 249, 3rd Floor
   DUESSELDORF, NORDRHEIN-WESTFALEN  40549
   Germany

   Email: fbrockne@cisco.com


   Shwetha Bhandari
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   Cessna Business Park, Sarjapura Marathalli Outer Ring Road
   Bangalore, KARNATAKA 560 087
   India

   Email: shwethab@cisco.com


   Ramesh Sivakolundu
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 West Tasman Dr.
   SAN JOSE, CA 95134
   U.S.A.

   Email: sramesh@cisco.com


   Carlos Pignataro
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   7200-11 Kit Creek Road
   Research Triangle Park, NC  27709
   United States

   Email: cpignata@cisco.com




Mizrahi, et al.        Expires September 11, 2019               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                 IOAM Flags                     March 2019


   Aviv Kfir
   Mellanox Technologies, Inc.
   350 Oakmead Parkway, Suite 100
   Sunnyvale, CA  94085
   U.S.A.

   Email: avivk@mellanox.com


   Barak Gafni
   Mellanox Technologies, Inc.
   350 Oakmead Parkway, Suite 100
   Sunnyvale, CA  94085
   U.S.A.

   Email: gbarak@mellanox.com


   Mickey Spiegel
   Barefoot Networks
   4750 Patrick Henry Drive
   Santa Clara, CA  95054
   US

   Email: mspiegel@barefootnetworks.com


   John Lemon
   Broadcom
   270 Innovation Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   US

   Email: john.lemon@broadcom.com

















Mizrahi, et al.        Expires September 11, 2019              [Page 10]
